Document PublishReadyToRun (#20729)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/deploying/ready-to-run.md

---
title: Ready to Run
description: Learn what ReadyToRun is and why you should consider using it as part of the deployment.
author: davidwr
ms.author: davidwr
ms.date: 09/21/2020
---
# ReadyToRun Compilation
Startup time and application latency can be improved by compiling your application assemblies as ReadyToRun (R2R) format. R2R is a form of ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation.

R2R binaries improve startup performance by reducing the amount of work the just-in-time (JIT) compiler needs to do as your application loads. The binaries contain similar native code compared to what the JIT would produce. However, R2R binaries are larger because they contain both intermediate language (IL) code, which is still needed for some scenarios, and the native version of the same code. R2R is only available when you publish an app that targets specific runtime environments (RID) such as Linux x64 or Windows x64.

To compile your project as ReadyToRun, do the following:

> 01. Add the `<PublishReadyToRun>` setting to your project:

Reviewer: Does this also need to mention that optionally /p:PublishReadyToRun could be passed to `dotnet publish` too?

    ```xml
    <PropertyGroup>
      <PublishReadyToRun>true</PublishReadyToRun>
    </PropertyGroup>
    ```

> 02. Publish an application. For example, this command creates an app for the 64-bit version of Windows:

Reviewer 2: It would be better to say 'the x64 version' (ARM64 is also 64-bit).

> 02. Publish an application. For example, this command creates a app for the 64-bit version of Windows:

Reviewer 3: Nit - "a app" -> "an app"?

    ```dotnetcli

>     dotnet publish -c Release -r win-x64

Reviewer 4: The doc above says it is available only for self-contained apps. However, you are not passing the `--self-contained` command line option here. Does the publish automatically add that when the project has the PublishReadyToRun property set?

Author: Ah, oops, I meant to remove the self-contained requirement... that was changed.

Author: Ah, that requirement changed, and is no longer in force. I missed that when I copied and pasted from the what's new document in .NET Core 3.0

    ```

## Impact of using the ReadyToRun feature

### General impact

> Ahead of time compilation has somewhat complex and unpredictable performance impacts on application performance. In general the size of an assembly will grow to between 2 to 3 times larger. This increase in the physical size of the file may reduce the performance of loading the assembly from disk, and increase working set of the process. However, in return the number of methods compiled is typically reduced substantially. The result is that most applications that consist of a substantial amount of code receive large performance benefits from enabling ReadyToRun. Applications which have small amounts of code will likely not experience a significant improvement from enabling ReadyToRun, as the .NET framework assemblies have already been precompiled with ReadyToRun.

Reviewer 2: 'Unpredictable' sounds too strong here.  I would try rewording, e.g.,
> Ahead-of-time compilation has somewhat complex performance impact on application performance, which may be difficult to predict.

Also, could we please use consistent spelling of 'ahead-of-time' (regarding hyphens) at all places?

> Ahead of time compilation has somewhat complex and unpredictable performance impacts on application performance. In general the size of an assembly will grow to between 2 to 3 times larger. This increase in the physical size of the file may reduce the performance of loading the assembly from disk, and increase working set of the process. However, in return the number of methods compiled is typically reduced substantially. The result is that most applications that consist of a substantial amount of code receive large performance benefits from enabling ReadyToRun. Applications which have small amounts of code will likely not experience a significant improvement from enabling ReadyToRun, as the .NET framework assemblies have already been precompiled with ReadyToRun.

Reviewer 2: > the number of methods compiled is typically reduced substantially

I would insert 'by the JIT' or 'at run time'.

Reviewer: > somewhat complex and unpredictable performance impacts
"unpredictable" performance might cause some anxiety. Perhaps it can be paraphrased ?

Author: @mangod9 I've taken Anton's rewording of the unpredictable sentence, which I think is a substantial improvement.

> Ahead of time compilation has somewhat complex and unpredictable performance impacts on application performance. In general the size of an assembly will grow to between 2 to 3 times larger. This increase in the physical size of the file may reduce the performance of loading the assembly from disk, and increase working set of the process. However, in return the number of methods compiled is typically reduced substantially. The result is that most applications that consist of a substantial amount of code receive large performance benefits from enabling ReadyToRun. Applications which have small amounts of code will likely not experience a significant improvement from enabling ReadyToRun, as the .NET framework assemblies have already been precompiled with ReadyToRun.

Reviewer 5: .NET framework -> .NET runtime libraries

> Note that the startup improvement discussed here applies not only to application startup, but also to the first use of any code in the application. For instance, ReadyToRun can be used to reduce the response latency of the first use  of a WebAPI in an ASP.NET application.

Reviewer 2: > first use  of a WebAPI

Nit (space, no article):
> first use of Web API

### Interaction with tiered compilation

> Ahead of time code generation quality is generally slightly worse than the quality of code produced by the JIT. To address this issue, tiered compilation will replace commonly used ReadyToRun methods with JIT generated methods.

Reviewer 2: > JIT generated methods

Nit: I'd prefer 'JIT-generated'.

> Ahead of time code generation quality is generally slightly worse than the quality of code produced by the JIT. To address this issue, tiered compilation will replace commonly used ReadyToRun methods with JIT generated methods.

Reviewer: > is generally slightly worse than the quality
Perhaps say not highly optimized as what the JIT might produce.

## How is the set of precompiled assemblies chosen?
The SDK will precompile the assemblies that are distributed with the application. For self-contained applications this will include recompiling the framework. C++/CLI binaries are not eligible for ReadyToRun compilation.

## How is the set of methods to precompile chosen?

> The compiler will attempt to pre-compile as many methods as it can. However various reasons it is not expected that using the ReadyToRun feature will result in preventing the JIT from executing.

Reviewer 3: Nit - should this be "However *for* various reasons ..."?

Reviewer 2: > preventing the JIT from executing

I would rather word it like this:
> The compiler will attempt to pre-compile as many methods as it can. However, for various reasons some methods may still need to be compiled by the JIT at run time.

Such reasons may include, but are not limited to:

> - Use of generic types defined in seperate assemblies

Reviewer 4: A nit: seperate->separate

- Use of generic types defined in separate assemblies
- Interop with native code

> - Use of hardware intrinsics which the compiler cannot prove are safe to use at publish time

Reviewer 2: > intrinsics which the compiler cannot prove are safe

Nit: I think technically we should use 'that' instead of 'which', because some intrinsics are considered safe.

Reviewer 2: One more nit, it may be misread as 'cannot prove are (safe to use at publish time)' instead of 'cannot prove are (safe to use) at publish time'. Maybe we should reword it, e.g.,
> cannot prove are safe to use on a target machine

- Certain unusual IL patterns
- Dynamic method creation via reflection, or LINQ

#### Cross platform/architecture restrictions

> The ReadyToRun compiler does not support completely general purpose cross-compilation. Supported compilation targets are described below.

Reviewer 2: > completely general purpose cross-compilation

I could not understand what 'general purpose' means without looking at the table below. I would try rewording, e.g.,
> For some SDK platforms the ReadyToRun compiler is capable of cross-compiling for other target platforms. Supported compilation targets are described in the table below.

| SDK platform | Supported target platforms |
| ------------ | --------------------------- |

> | Windows X64  | Windows X86, Windows X64, Windows ARM32, Windows ARM64 |

Reviewer 2: In Fadi's host/target matrix x64-hosted crossgen could not target x86. I assume it has been enabled recently.

Author: x64 hosted crossgen cannot target x86, but the X64 SDK can use the X86 hosted crossgen, and does. When we move to crossgen2, it will be slightly different, and we will use an X64 hosted crossgen2 to target X86.

Reviewer 2: Thank you for clarification.

| Linux X64    | Linux X86, Linux X64, Linux ARM32, Linux ARM64 |

> | Linux AMR32  | Linux ARM32 |

Reviewer 4: AMR32 -> ARM32
AMR64 -> ARM64

---

> title: Ready to Run

Reviewer 6: Is this correct? It's using `Ready to Run` with spacing yet everywhere else it's `ReadyToRun`. The title should be improved, we have about 40 characters to use here to help with search. How about

```suggestion
title: ReadyToRun deployment overview
```

> description: Learn what ReadyToRun is and why you should consider using it as part of the deployment.

Reviewer 6: Add more search keywords here. How about:
```suggestion
description: Learn what ReadyToRun deployments are and why you should consider using it as part of the publishing your app with .NET 5 and .NET Core 3.0 and later.
```

author: davidwr
ms.author: davidwr
ms.date: 09/21/2020
---

> # ReadyToRun Compilation
> Startup time and application latency can be improved by compiling your application assemblies as ReadyToRun (R2R) format. R2R is a form of ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation.

Reviewer 6: Again, these should have more keywords
```suggestion
# ReadyToRun compilation for .NET apps

.NET application startup time and latency can be improved by compiling your application assemblies in ReadyToRun (R2R) format. R2R is a form of ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation.
```

R2R binaries improve startup performance by reducing the amount of work the just-in-time (JIT) compiler needs to do as your application loads. The binaries contain similar native code compared to what the JIT would produce. However, R2R binaries are larger because they contain both intermediate language (IL) code, which is still needed for some scenarios, and the native version of the same code. R2R is only available when you publish an app that targets specific runtime environments (RID) such as Linux x64 or Windows x64.

> To compile your project as ReadyToRun, the application must be published, with the PublishReadyToRun property set to true.

Reviewer 6: Removed comma.

```suggestion
To compile your project as ReadyToRun, the application must be published with the PublishReadyToRun property set to true.
```

> There are 2 general approaches to do this:

Reviewer 6: The word general doesn't really indicate anything. Are you stating here are some general approaches and there are other specific approaches?

```suggestion
There are two ways to publish your app as ReadyToRun:
```

01. Specify the PublishReadyToRun flag directly to the dotnet publish command. See [dotnet publish](../tools/dotnet-publish.md) for details.

02. Specify the property in the project

- Add the `<PublishReadyToRun>` setting to your project:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
  <PublishReadyToRun>true</PublishReadyToRun>
</PropertyGroup>
```

> - Publish the application without any special parameters
> 
> 
> ```dotnetcli

Reviewer 6: Fix markdown lint error

```suggestion
- Publish the application without any special parameters

```dotnetcli
```
